Daft 0.0.21 Release Notes
=========================

The Daft 0.0.21 release features many bugfixes and the introduction of the DynamicRayRunner from @xcharleslin.


New Features
------------

Dynamic Ray Runner
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Continuation of work by @xcharleslin to implement a dynamic runner for the Ray backend! This scheduler is under active development and will be the default scheduler for Ray in future Daft releases.

See: `#412 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/412>`_

Telemetry
^^^^^^^^^

Telemetry was added to help Daft development. To disable, use the environment variable ``DAFT_ANALYTICS_ENABLED=0``.

See: `#413 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/413>`_ and :doc:`Telemetry docs <../telemetry>` for more details

Enhancements
------------

* Rust Series Basic math `#437 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/437>`_
* Simplify Analytics Client to single-threaded implementation `#436 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/436>`_
* Dynamic scheduler mega cleanup: Refactors, renames, docstrings, comments `#434 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/434>`_
* Fix DynamicRayRunner performance issues. Warmup more works in benchmarking script. `#430 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/430>`_
* Move Instructions to dataclasses. `#428 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/428>`_
* Add analytics module for telemetry `#413 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/413>`_
* DynamicRayRunner optimizations: metadata fetch on demand; ray.wait for task management `#418 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/418>`_
* Add profiling to benchmarks/tpch. Improve profiler to prevent VizTracer nesting. `#423 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/423>`_
* Base Rust Skeleton `#421 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/421>`_

Bug Fixes
---------

* Fix alias evaluation `#448 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/448>`_
* Fix self-referencing if-else test `#446 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/446>`_
* Add support and tests for columns created only from literals `#445 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/445>`_
* Sorts on non-column expression `#299 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/299>`_


Build Changes
-------------


* Daft nightly publishing prepend 0s to dev version to fix pip lexical ordering `#453 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/453>`_
* run notebooks check in separate working dir `#452 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/452>`_
* Check doc notebooks daily at noon `#451 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/451>`_
* add http to fsspec package `#450 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/450>`_
* Remove Mamba from publishing CI `#449 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/449>`_
* Cookbook test cleanups `#438 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/438>`_
* Change envvar DAFT\_PKG\_BUILD\_TYPE to RUST\_DAFT\_PKG\_BUILD\_TYPE `#432 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/432>`_
* Add DAFT\_PKG\_BUILD\_TYPE to python-publish CI job `#424 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/424>`_


Documentation
-------------

* Typos in telemetry docs `#429 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/429>`_
* Refreshes our 10 minute tutorial `#431 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/431>`_
* API Documentation refactors `#427 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/pull/427>`_

Closed Issues
-------------

* Remove Sentry `#435 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/issues/435>`_
* add profiling flag to benchmark `#422 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/issues/422>`_
* DynamicRayRunner optimization: spread strategy for reduce `#420 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/issues/420>`_
* Make DynamicRayRunner strictly faster than RayRunner `#419 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/issues/419>`_
* Benchmark DynamicSchedule. `#406 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/issues/406>`_
* RayRunner for DynamicSchedule `#405 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/issues/405>`_
* PartitionCache for DynamicSchedule `#404 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/issues/404>`_
* Refactor DynamicSchedule to be generators. `#403 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/issues/403>`_
* Alias doesn't work on main branch `#447 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/issues/447>`_
* Fix creation of literal columns `#444 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/issues/444>`_
* Fix aggregations on a self-referencing `if_else` `#441 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/issues/441>`_
* .sort\(\) breaks on non-column Expression `#439 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/issues/439>`_
* Repr broken for boolean columns `#425 <https://github.com/Eventual-Inc/Daft/issues/425>`_
